Hello everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, November 25th, 2024. And I'm the host of the show, Dr. Cara Santa Maria. I'm happy Thanksgiving to my American listeners and any who celebrate abroad. I am excited about this week's episode. I think, I don't know, it has a little bit of extra special sauce maybe because I've been not feeling so hot post-election, I've been, you know, kind of struggling to find hope. And there was just a little bit of magic in this show and I really hope that you all feel the same way. Before we dive into it, I do want to thank those of you who make Talk Nerdy possible. Remember, this show is and will always be 100% free to download and the way we keep it going is by relying on the support of individuals just like you. If you would like to pledge your support for the time being on an episodic basis, all you've got to do is visit patreon.com slash Talk Nerdy. This week's top patrons include a new buttovage, Daniel Lang, David J.E. Smith, Mary Neva, Brian Holden, David Compton, Gabrielle F. Haramio, Joe Wilkinson, Joseph Lamore, Pascuali Delati, Rika Maharaj, and Ulrika Hagman. All right. So this week I had the opportunity to speak with Dr. Catherine Rundall. She has a new book out, but before I tell you about that, you should know that she is a fellow of St. Catherine's College Oxford and she has written a bunch of different novels for children that have won a ton of awards. They've been translated into a bunch of languages. She sold more than two million copies worldwide and she's written for a bunch of other outlets. I said a bunch a lot there. She's written for many other outlets as well, but her new book is called Vanishing Treasures, a bestiary of extraordinary endangered creatures. So without any further ado, I hope that you feel the same kind of magic that I did in speaking with Dr. Catherine Rundall. Well, Catherine, thank you so much for joining me today. Thank you so much for having me. It's a real pleasure. So I'm excited to talk about your new book, Vanishing Treasures of the Bestiary. Is it a Bestiary? Is that how you pronounce it? It's extraordinary endangered creatures. Exactly that. So before we even get into what a Bestiary is, I would love to talk first about sort of your background, what you do with your time and how this book came to be. So tell us a little bit about sort of your title. So I am a fellow of St. Catherine's College, Oxford. I did my PhD on Renaissance literature, in fact, on the Renaissance poet John Dunn. And then I also spend a lot of my time writing children's fiction. I have a book called Impossible Creatures, which just came out in America. And then I would say Vanishing Treasures is the project that belongs to my heart and soul and bones in that it is a bit to write about the natural world and about endangerment and climate change in a way that you can also give to your uncle who isn't completely on board with that. And I wanted it to be in some ways. It's 23 essays about animals. And some of it is science, but a huge amount of it is history and myth and a sense of the way that we have interacted with misunderstood, misunderstood these creatures. But I wanted it to be a little bit funny and a little bit sharp. And sort of Trojan Horse, my way into people's attention, to say, well, you look at these wonders. Well, you look at what we still do not know. And would you agree to astonishment? And if you would agree to astonishment, would you then agree to fight? Because we have never needed to fight more ever than now. And so how did you choose, you know, I was going to say who? What? Or what? To highlight in the book. So it was such a process of winnowing. I have many, many half written accounts of the living world. But so it would often be that there was a remarkable story. I usually pick a creature where there is something that you will have latched onto your imagination. So for instance, I write about hermit crabs because it was probably a hermit crab who ate Amelia Earhart. And I write about seals because there was once a seal who learned to speak sentences of English in a very, very strong Boston accent. And then the criteria for inclusion was, are a species or subspecies of this animal endangered? And as you can imagine in the world we stand on now, that now is it down almost not at all. Almost everything has a subspecies, which is endangered. And things you wouldn't expect like grows and pigeons and spiders. There are still things whose future on the planet is uncertain. Yeah. Yeah. And so tell us, you know, I guess I don't even know where to start with this because there's so much, there's so much here, right? But maybe we can pick a story and we can start with a story and then move on from there. So obviously you had to winnow down all of these beautiful stories, but was there one or maybe a small group of them that inspired the whole book? Was there a story you wanted to tell that then you were able to build off of? Yes, absolutely. So the book began with the pangolin. And in fact, some of these essays were originally in the London Review of Books, most of my wrote for the book, but the first one I wrote years ago, I think in 2018, when I had been, I spent part of my childhood in Zimbabwe because my father worked in International Aid. And I had gone back to visit family. And while I was there, I was taken to see a pangolin. And when I got home, I told my friends about this as one of the most beautiful things that I have ever seen with my eyes in my life. And the vast majority of them didn't know what it was. And I thought, right, well, there is so little I can do about the many, many sorrows of the world, but I can force people to know what a pangolin is. And so I wrote this essay about the idea of a pangolin. And of course, it makes perfect sense that we wouldn't know about them because our education is fairly lacking in the way that we talk about the natural world in schools and universities, socially, but a pangolin is a scale antita. And it looks like if you had coated an antita in a sort of gray, green scale. And they have remarkably beautiful, generous faces. They look like a very polite and thoughtful academic. And they are one of the great miracles of the world. And they are deeply, deeply trafficked. Aren't they the most trafficked animal on the planet? The most trafficked animal on the planet, exactly that. So they have a very strong defense against predators, which is that they roll themselves into a ball. And that's where then when name comes from, from the Malay word, pangolin, which means roller. But of course, for us, that means that what they have done is rendering themselves immediately and easily portable. So they have no defenses against us. And across the world, particularly in China, they are eaten as a delicacy and their scales are sold as forms of medicine. And so their future on the planet looks increasingly like if we have this conversation in 50 years, there may be no more. And that would seem to me a stupidity that we couldn't expect to be forgiven for. Because they are so beautiful. They are so deeply part of many cultures, so in Zimbabwean culture, parents tell their children that a loovial goal, the goal you find in the earth, is actually pangolin droppings. And that pangolin droppings are pure gold. Yeah, I love that. I have to ask you. I mean, you have this way of speaking. Obviously, you have a way of writing. But the way of speaking and way of writing really are deeply connected, which isn't always the case when I interview writers. What do you think? Is this just your personality? Is this your core? Or do you think that this was deeply informed by your kind of academic training in, you know, a historical literature? That's such a good question. I think it's my personality. I think I've always been like this. I think so much of it is I had a very distinctive childhood. I was in a landscape where you could be outside with your friends without parental supervision in the wild. So often, so a huge amount of my childhood was spent outside just roaming, watching the natural world. You know, you could just sit and watch a grasshopper or a snake or a monkey or a bird. And then when I wasn't that, I was reading. And I was obsessed with books. And I had the sense that books were a kind of food to me. I think if you had said at the time, what do you love doing? It wouldn't have occurred to me to say, I love reading. In the same way, it wouldn't have occurred to me to say, I love eating. It was just absolutely part of my landscape. And I just read all the books that I could find. I read my way through the children's library, which wasn't big. And then I went my way through the adults library after that. And do you think that that contributed to your interest in writing fiction for children? I think so, yes. I think one of the things about writing for children is it requires the discipline of total clarity. Because you cannot obfuscate or self-congratulate or elongate for children. They will just stop reading. And so I think I had this sense of like, this is a gift. This form of discipline will impose on work. When it's good, I mean, there's a lot of terrible children's writing, of course. But great children's writing is great in part because of the discipline that the child reader imposes on the work, to get to the point to make it sharp and vivid and bold and worth reading. I think that is probably very much part of the reason that I write for, you know, those sort of eight to 14 age bracket. But don't we need that too, as adults? Does that translate into your work for adults? I hope so. I get asked this so much. I think it's such a fascinating thing. How different are they? How different is it writing a big, a mattened adventure, mythical story for a 12-year-old and writing a, in some places, quite complicated account of the way you might decipher the age of a Greenland shark for adults? And I would say they're the same. I think you have the same duties. The discipline of, is it true? Is it accurate? Is it morally true? Is it factually true? The discipline of, is it vivid? Is it, you are so busy. We are all so busy. The world is full of so many calls upon our time. No writer has a right to your time. So it has to be worth your time. Your time is fleeting and the greatest thing you can offer me. So it has to be worth it. And then finally, and I guess it's the most ruthless discipline, does it matter? So the pieces I write about animals, they're short. They tend to be between one and two thousand words. But of course they start off much longer and they get shorter and shorter. You know, I think the discipline of compactness is one that really makes you think, if someone's only going to remember three things in this chapter, what do you want it to be? And is that really your process? Is that you produce a lot and then call? Yes, but for this nonfiction work. In the same way that I wrote a nonfiction biography of John Dunn, the Renaissance poet, who was the subject of my doctoral thesis and what I used to teach at Oxford. And with that, it was vastly longer. It was, I mean, at its worst. I think it was maybe three times the length of the final book. And then your job is to say, it is not fair to put the duty of winnowing and sorting onto a reader who might never have heard of John Dunn. If you have spent a decade reading about John Dunn, it is your duty to say, actually, you know what they don't need to know exactly how much it cost to mend this full set of bells and the church that he was working in in 1614. You know, that's my job, not yours. And I think sometimes they get exasperated with books where it feels like they haven't quite done enough of the winnowing. I've done enough of the decision making. I want writers to know what matters and to offer it to me. And how does the writer decide? How, I mean, that's really a lot of power. I mean, that really is the power, right, in being the one who produces the words on the page. But what is that process like? And do you think it's different for every single writer? I think it is different for every writer. And of course, I think it is deeply informed by the way that the information economy now works. I think that if I had been writing vanishing treasures in the year 1880, I would have included everything I knew about every creature because you would have had very few other accesses information about the pangolin. But you right now, within half an hour, could discover hundreds of facts about the pangolin, perhaps not the slightly more out of the way ones in the book, but certainly like the basics, very quickly. So for that reason, I am never trying to be exhaustive. Instead, what I want to be is selective. I want to tell you, these are the things that the scientists think you should know. And these are the things that the old myths would tell you. And this is the best anecdote I've ever heard about this creature. And then my dream would be you might read the book and you might fall wildly in love with an owl. And then you might go and read a monograph about novels or even two or three until you felt that the novel was deeply your ally. But the thing is, one of the things you discover, these pieces, they take me a couple of months each. And so you do end up knowing a lot. And the moment you know, I would say a thousand words worth of knowledge about an animal, you feel it differently when you see it. The minute you know five truths about the crow or five truths about the one bat, when you see them, you feel that they are yours to protect. You feel more of a duty towards them. You feel they are more alive for you. You know, the, you know, the, the matabolization to metabolize knowledge into love. I think the time that takes is tight. I think you can do that in, in a single essay if you make it sharp enough. When you wrote these essays, did you, did you write them sort of piecemeal? Did you write them for other outlets first and then combine them or were, was the point always to include them in the book? The point always was to include them in the book. And I had, I don't know how long it was many months, I guess, a half a year or so. When I was writing just, just these pieces, I have this huge stroke of luck, which is because I belong to Oxford University, a lot of my colleagues are scientists. So if you want to double check something about the novel horn or the precise makeup of a giraffe's leg movement, then you can find a giraffe scientist. And that was one of the great joys. But yes, they were, they were quite a concerted timescale for me, rather than doing, you know, one or that. But as they say, I did also write them. I wrote a few a year for the LRB for a few years. How did, how did the process of researching and then writing or researching and simultaneously writing these individual stories? How did it change your relationship to these animals into the natural world? I think I had always been aware that wilderness and living things have a complexity and profound forms of knowing that we do not have yet the makeup to understand. I always knew that, but it has been born in upon me so profoundly. I mean, if you speak to scientists of the living world, the thing they will want to tell you over and over, you know, they will tell you within 10 minutes of meeting them. The thing they want you to know is that we know a huge amount about the living world, about spiders and frogs and trees and earth. But what we know, in comparison to what there is to know, is barely touching the tiniest edge of the beginning of the truth. And so when I went about writing these pieces, I would, I would first read some monographs, talk to mockumentaries, speak to some scientists, but I was always aware that there is a great deal we do not know. And I think that's what really was born into me while I was writing these pieces. It's the thing that changed me. When we look at the natural world, we do not know the depths of its nuance, the depths of the precision, the astonishing movements of evolution that have led us to these creatures. You know, things like we don't know how birds know where to fly when they migrate. We don't really know. We think it's probably to do with the gravitational pull of the Earth's core, but we don't know. And I think that that is something worth bearing in mind. We must not destroy this staggeringly beautiful, staggeringly strange, extraordinary thing that is the living world before we have a chance even to begin to understand it. You know, as I sit here and I listen to the passion in your voice, I can't help but feel that classic experience that I so often work through with my patients, which is this deep feeling of ambivalence, this deep, bittersweet feeling, this awe and wonder budding up against a darkness and a depression and a sadness at the, I don't want to say the potential for loss, but we're in it right now. We are actively losing these organisms. And I'm wondering how you sit in that place where darkness and light sort of meet and how you do right from that place or do you right from the light? It's such a good question and one you must face every day. I think often of Antonio Gramsci, who I'm sure you know, was imprisoned under fascist Mussolini and he wrote letters from Jail and he said this famous thing which I'm sure all your listeners will have heard, which is I am a pessimist because of intellect, but an optimist because of will. I think there are many, many reasons to despair and I think sometimes it can feel like your despair is itself a kind of prophylactic against disaster, a kind of praxis, but your despair and misery and sorrow are not helpful. And so I try as much as possible to remind myself that despair does not in itself change anything and you know, it is too important to despair. It is too important to lose hope. And so there are of course days we have just lived through some of them where the only reasonable option looks like horror and dread or like it's very close cousin which is throwing up your hands and saying well, climate change is certainly now going all the way so he might as well just eat and drink and be merry because it's over, but it's not over and the time to give up is never. And so I tell myself when I'm writing, my despair can go into the bits in the book where it talks about what we have done in terms of climate change in times of habitat loss, but my despair is not good meat. It will nourish nobody. And so mostly what I want to do is offer this fact that hope is also a truth. Faith is also a truth and action requires those things. It requires some element of faith that it might work. So my hope is active these days. I'm not sure I feel it in my chest so much as I feel it in my feet and hands. I love it. And to clarify for those listening because we're recording this in real time, it's going to air not in real time, we're recording this on Friday, November 8, only like three days after the American presidential election when I think that there is a collective sense of despair and a collective sense of throwing up our hands. And I think what I appreciate so deeply from you right now, Catherine is that one of the things that has been frustrating for me when I talk to friends and family members and when I see things on social media is the sort of saccharine, polyanna response, which feels so thin and inauthentic. But I do not have any doubt in my mind that this hope of which you speak is it's not manufactured and it's not like a tincture that you're describing, but it's there in spite of the despair. Exactly that. It lives alongside and the thing is I think in the new world that we live in after the selection, I think I am willing to accept that I will live with dread in the pit of my stomach because that is based on fact. And I think I'll probably live with it now forever to be honest, I had it before the election, but in some ways that doesn't matter. What matters is what I do and what matters is what we all do. And so I feel like I get asked a lot how, you know, I feel terrible anxiety or my child feels terrible anxiety. What can I do about that climate anxiety? Is there a book you can offer? And of course, I would love you to read this book and I hope it has hope in it, but really the finest way to calm the rising tide of horror that will oversleep your body is to act. If you happen to be lucky enough to have money, give it away. If you happen to have money that is invested, go tomorrow and make sure that no jot of it is invested in fossil fuels. Rest, get involved in politics, eat less or no meat, vow to fly infinitely less. And at that point, your horror will still be there, but at least there will be within yourself. I like that battles it. You know the way Martin Luther King, I always forget the actual quote, but he says something like the right temporarily defeated is still greater than evil triumphant. And so, you know, I just think find ways to keep fighting and sometimes the way to keep fighting is just to begin fighting. Absolutely. I mean, I think right now in this moment, I'm a bit over over come with some emotion. I had two podcasts scheduled this morning here. I'm here in Los Angeles, so it's just become afternoon. And my car, my truck actually is packed. My bags are packed. And as soon as we finish this hour, I'm driving to like a remote place outside of the city so that I can spend the night in nature. And it's what it's the only thing I can do right now. It's the only thing I can think to do with the way that I feel. I don't think I'm ready to fight. I think I'm quite tired of fighting and I need to rest. But I think that part of that process is being with the very world that we're fighting for. Exactly that. And of course, the thing we forget is that the things we do are contagious. So if you go out into the natural world and you find ways to make that work and you tell your friends and your friends tell their friends, you know, one of the things we need is to make more people remember or know if they never knew because I think one thing we must never forget is how deeply embedded in privilege access to the natural world is. I think if we can just make it something more and more and more, the way that we experience peace, leisure, hope, I think that it does shift the way a human stands on the earth. We need to be reminded often we're a very, very forgetful species. We need to be reminded often that we too are nature. We too are animals and the idea that we would not spend some of our time in the living world. No wonder so many of us feel alienated and lost. You know, we cannot cut ourselves off from nature without feeling the pain of it. And I think you are so wise to put yourself back under large skies. How often did you do that very thing as you were writing about these creatures? How often did you find yourself in their presence, whether in a protected way, like, you know, through, and we can talk about, we don't have to talk on this show, but we could talk offline about the complex ethical parameters around like zoos, for example, or just, you know, having the opportunity to actually encounter them in a natural setting. So I have been very lucky. I spend a lot of my time in the countryside and I live in London, but I spend quite a lot of time when I can for weeks or months at a time in Norfolk and in Norfolk there are seals and you would never go near them. They do not need your attention or your sticky hands, you know, they don't need my little enthusiastic presence. But I swim a lot in the easy, if someone would say what's your very favourite thing in the world, I would say swimming in the sea. And sometimes they just come to you. Sometimes the seals will come curiously just to check out what you are and what you are doing. And that is a truly remarkable feeling. And then when I'm in London, I live near a park and there you do see wild things. It just takes time and patience to see them. And then there are things which I expect never to see. So I think I will never see a normal because I think to put myself in a position to see a normal would probably be quite harmful to the normal. So there are things where I am content that my love would be damaging to them. So what I'll do is I will read instead and watch, you know, the stunning wildlife footage that professionals have made and salute them from afar. That's such a brilliant kind of meditation on the role of humanity which we are animals. And we have our own relationship to the planet. And yet we constantly grapple with such a firm appreciation that it becomes an extractive practice. It's such a difficult thing because I think when we truly look at the roots of this sort of colonial disastrous extraction of our planet, it comes from a place of a deep hunger for experience. Exactly. That what do you do about the fact that we long to see that which is beautiful? And because, you know, we as animals long to be alongside other animals and the person who longs to go to the Maldives to see the giant turtles, longs to do it out of hunger for knowledge of them up close. You know, I know people who have never cried in their lives in their adult lives who says the first time that he ever cried was when he saw an ancient turtle. And it's a very difficult balancing act. How do we balance our desire for knowledge and our profound love of these creatures with the knowledge that the technologies we built to get us there are themselves damaging. And I think it's something that we all have to hold in the balance constantly. You know, I have a friend who flies a lot but eats no food that has flown to her. And that is her compromise which means she eats, you know, a heck of a lot of potatoes and kale. And that's the decision that she's made in order to allow herself to fly. And I think it's something that we should all, I don't know the answer, but I do feel it's a question that we should keep asking and not allow people who would roll their eyes and you know, say that it is precious or pointless or what difference is one person going to make. Because you know, there's that amazing moment in that film Adam's rib. It's got Catherine Hepburn and it's one of my favorite films. It's in many ways insane. But it has this brilliant moment where she's quizzing her secretary and she says they're talking about infidelity and she says what if a man cheats on a woman and the girl says well, not nice, but and she says well, whatever woman cheats on a man and the secretary says the worst. And and Catherine Hepburn says why the difference and the girl says I don't know, I don't make the rules. And Catherine Hepburn says sure you do, we all do. And I think of that often, you know, cultural standards are built by all of us. And so I think that is why it is worth continuing asking those questions. Oh, I think that's such a, it's such an interesting meditation on an idea that sort of draws from existentialist philosophy that I often bring up with my with my patients, but also here on the podcast, I actually have a tattooed on my foot. Oh, wow. What do you have tattooed on your foot? I have tattooed existence precedes essence and not the other way around. And I mean, I think that this applies deeply for the human experience that we often like to ascribe essentialist explanations for behavior when those explanations are much more likely constructs. Yeah, much more likely than we are willing to imagine or fathom. And it is one of the great difficulties bound up, of course, with its partner difficulty, how then do you change those constructs? You know, and it's the question that we will have to ask now in a newly profoundly inhospitable place to that question, you know, how do we change how we have imagined joy, glamour, luxury, leisure time? How do we change those to make them as glorious, as fit for the light and glee and passion, but less wildly destructive? Make was the wildly destructive habits we have. There are only 100, 200 years old, then new. And the reimagining is necessary. It will come either by volitional by force, but it is one of those eternal questions. How do we shift a whole nation's or a whole world's or a small community's imaginings? And really, when does that shift to begin, I think, is an important question, you know, as a psychologist, I think about our cognitive development and I think about identity development. And this process by which we discover that we are volitional creatures and that we are change makers. And I think it comes sooner for some, much later for others and never at all for a certain percentage of people that we are not automatons and we are not destined to carry on whatever torch our mothers and fathers handed us. Yeah, right, exactly that. And of course, that is so bound up with the question of is change possible. As you say, the torch, we could put down the entire torch, we could light a whole new avenue of lights, but it is very difficult to remember it and it is very difficult to do an inertia and structural change or a real things, but it is something that I think about children a lot because my job is in part writing for them. And I do think it is possible to teach children profound things and to help them remember them. And so I do think it is possible within a few generations to change attitudes to the living world, but it requires many, many of us to fight and to remember that we are the many. What is that relationship then that you see between awe and wonder and action? So my reckoning would be, what is awe and wonder? I think they have been powerfully co-opted by the industry that makes posters of sunsets with cursive handwriting on them. When people say awe or wonder, I know that often what they are picturing is somebody telling you to live in the moment or relish everyday's beauty, yes of course, but also something far, far, far greater. And I think of it, I think of the ways that we have thought about astonishment and wonder over the centuries. And I think of it increasingly as an active thing. I think that your wonder requires something of you. I would say this, we owe the world our wonder because it is self-evidently wonderful. It is self-evidently so full of things of a complexity and beauty that passes our understanding, of course we owe it our wonder. But you cannot remain in a position of wonder at something you already know. We know this, you can love something, but you can't remain astonished by the familiar, that's very difficult to do. But what you can do is you can decide to learn until your deathbed. You can decide that the way you remain astonished is by learning the things to be astonished by. Whether that is learning about the natural world, about physics, about the astonishing chemistry of the ocean, and you can learn and learn and learn, and you will not come to the end of your learning before your death. There is so much to know and time is short. And so I think of that as the stepping stone. And then I think if you truly come to be deeply and meshed of knowledge of the world, then action becomes necessary. And I don't want to sound naive because I know it is very possible to love an elephant and then shoot it in the face. We know this, people have done this throughout history. But I do think that if we want action, what will drive it? I think rage and fury and fear, those are all helpful. But I don't think that they can be sustained by the human body. And so I think we will need something else and I think it will have to be a kind of iron-willed, furious, loving astonishment. American giant makes great clothing, sweatshirts, jeans, and more right here in the US. Visit American-gi-at.com and get 20% off your first order with code staple 20. That's 20% off your first order at American-gi-at.com code staple 20. You know, you mentioned that awe and wonder had to be an active process that this kind of furious astonishment is ongoing and one of the ways to feed that is through the hunger for more knowledge. And I actually do see a parallel between awe and wonder and love. And I'm from the, I'm of a tradition similar to what Eric from wrote about that love is not, I guess, a feeling, but it is a behavior and it's a choice. Just like empathy is not something that you're born with. It's not something that you, some people just have and some don't. It's a practice. You have to do it. And the more that you do it, the better you get at it. And I think that I would argue that love and empathy and awe, they all require, regular engagement to foster and grow. Absolutely. And of course, you know, so many philosophers have thought about, you know, Iris Murdoch, the idea that love and attention are so closely bound up as to be almost the same thing. And I think love and attention, astonishment, wonder, learning, they are all very close to being not synonyms, but collocates. They belong in the same family of practices. And I think often people think sitting and having hope is enough as an emotion. And I think that that is, as you say, these things, they are an active practice, a practice intellectually, spiritually and politically, physically. And so is the starting point, well, I shouldn't call it the starting point, but it's an early point of that process then engaging with stories, engaging with not just information, but deeply affecting information like that that you provide in your book. Is that one of the big goals of, you know, engaging in such an exhausting practice is to share your own passion in the hope that it may, I don't know, infect might be in my right word, be with a more positive valence than that, but to catch on, you know, with others. Exactly that. And I'm very aware, I know that books are a niche sport and I know the limits of the form, but I do think there is this one huge truth. We are story-eating animals. We hunger for stories and that can be a political story of the type that can conquer America, but there are stories that can lodge themselves in our brains. And so it's why like I just really, really want people to know that, you know, in 1827, a giraffe walked through the streets of Paris, down the Champs-Élysées and eight rose petals from the hands of the king of France. And yeah, and I want people to know that like what happened was France went insane and people started dressing like giraffes and wallpapering their houses with giraffes and, you know, the colors of the day were, you know, tears of the giraffe and giraffe and love. And women would make hairstyles to look like the two horns, the osacones of the giraffe, but their hairstyles would become so sort of vibrantly the horizontal of a vertical rather that they wouldn't be able to sit in their carriages because it would bump against the ceiling so they'd have to sit on the floor of their carriages. Like this idea of, you know, this absolute wild and enamoring. And, you know, it seems to me that that's the reasonable response. To see a giraffe and go a little unhinged, that seems sensible to me. And I think I could tell you lovely facts about the giraffe, but you'd forget all of them, but you might not forget the idea of a giraffe in a couture Paris made flur-de-li embroidered ring coat. You know, walking through the streets and looking for peace. You know, and so I think that is for me why, why I want to tell these, these snippets, these flashes of history in the hope that they might get under people's skin. And then, you know, all the money from the book goes to my money anyway. The royalties goes to climate change charities because as of the election result, I've wanted the book to be a little part in the fight. So, you know, the idea that stories might generate money, which might generate a tiny drop in the ocean of the need in this fight. Oh, that's incredible. And, you know, I was kind of resisting asking a question when you were sharing that fabulous story about the giraffe. But now I feel like I must because I think that this is a perfect segue into it. You have chosen to take the, I guess, the fruits of your labor and put them in a place where they can do good. The person in Paris who was observing this bizarre and charismatic creature walking down the street, one person chooses to emulate that creature in the fashion of the day. Another person chooses to engage with nature in a deeply sort of reverent and preserving way. And yet another person chooses to conquer that animal and say, we must get more. We must put them in the zoos. We must kill one so I can display it in, you know, my sitting room. And so, the awe and the wonder, I guess there's a responsibility even to that. With how do we, what do we do with that awe and wonder? I mean, that's so very true that one of the ways that people have chosen to love giraffe is to shoot them and then make a cushion of their heads complete with the eyelashes that are attached or get a Bible cover in giraffe skin or a cover for your shotgun case in giraffe skin. So I think we have to be wary of thinking of passionate interest as an unadulterated and obvious good. Of course, it's not. Of course, you can adore giraffes and therefore want to fill your house with dead ones. And so I guess at that point you start thinking about ethics, about the idea that you'll wonder if you have a duty to it, your duty is the duty of the ethics of the living world. And we know what those ethics are. Those ethics are users little as you can. Take notes from every other living ecosystem that is not ours. A note how to live in symbiosis and not to exhaust your resources in the way that you know, the West has done. Yeah. And perhaps a meta ethic here, a lesson that I'm, I feel like I'm kind of learning in real time is that we shouldn't ignore or minimize the very love that leads sometimes to these deeply destructive and misguided behaviors in, in sort of producing or providing pressure to reduce those kinds of behaviors. We should highlight the very love that that preceded them and find a new outlet for that love and that awe. Exactly. And of course, that is so much of it is bound up with our acquisitiveness because I could find you a giraffe's head cushion that looked very like a true giraffe's head but that was made by Romantical Artisan who, who's skill with, with material is such that you can have that cushion as a way to signal your adoration. But I think we also have to factor in the fact that our acquisitiveness has some element of power. You know, the idea of the Medici's who would fill a square with wild beasts and then let them free so that they could be hunted. And part of the lure of those creatures was that they were rare. You know, why do people want tiger skins? Yes, because they're beautiful, but also because they are endangered. And the book touches on this a little bit. The idea of, it's a truly bleak idea of extinction hoarding in the chapter about Tunavish, the idea that because wild, non-farmed, bluefin tuna, particularly a few years ago were critically endangered. There were companies, Mitsubishi among them, who were buying up great stocks of these tuna. And I should say that they deny this, but many conservationists believe that what they were doing is in keeping it stored at very, very low temperatures, waiting for extinction to come. Because at that point, these corpses become infinitely more valuable. And we know this happens with, for instance, Rhino Horn. We know that there are poachers out there who are employed to shoot, many conservationists cut a rhino's horn off so that they won't be poached for their horn. But there are poachers who are being paid to shoot rhino's without marketable horns just in order to bring about the final death quicker. It's a form of vile humanity known as extinction gambling. And I think when we think about things like extinction, I think we need to factor that into our understanding of mankind. I believe in our staggering capacity for change and for unbelievable efforts to do good, to protect, to nurture, to nourish. But I think it is better that we do not forget that other flip side. And you know, I think that here as we're sort of coming to the end of this conversation, and we are entering into this sort of grappling with some of these darker questions, it's also important, at least, and maybe this is simply my perspective, because I am not a religious person at all. And I don't believe in the sort of simple categorizations of good and evil and, you know, light and dark nature. But that many of these very vile practices that are sort of unequivocally terrible, they don't come from a place of evil, but they come from a place of desperation of, you know, greed is often built out of insecurity, and that certain practices may not have to exist if certain people were able to exist comfortably on this planet. And I can't help us see an interplay there between how we treat the most vulnerable among ourselves, and how we treat these vulnerable creatures. Absolutely. And I think that is wholly right, as you say, both at a profound psychological level, and also just in the most basic practical terms, I love wild things, and I love the non, you know, the great parliament of the non-human. But I think, you know, I also think we are such love and care to those people whose livelihoods have been most eroded. So for instance, if you want to stop people poaching the most endangered limos in Madagascar, engage in child nutrition, engage with the poorest because it is only because there are so few other ways for people to feed their children that those lemas are being poached. And so I think, you know, when we talk about the need, I know there are people who would like to separate the needs of the animal world and the needs of the human world, perhaps people who understandably are exhausted by humanity, but we are so bound up with each other. And, you know, humanity is itself a great and shining thing. One of the things the book points out is that, you know, the process of respiration casts out photons, which are the elementary particle of light. So the human body is itself a shining thing. We are constantly emitting light, mostly from around the face. We are for all our horrors. We are remarkable miraculous animals. What a stunning and profound button to put on this beautiful conversation at a time when I really needed to have this conversation. And I just, I really want to thank you for sharing your wisdom, your poetry, your insights and your passion with us here on the show. Thank you so much for having me. It's been a real delight. And I hope, I hope your night under large stars is a very fine one. Oh, thank you so much. Everyone, the book is vanishing treasures, a bestiary of extraordinary endangered creatures by Dr. Catherine Bundle. Catherine, thank you so much for being here and everyone listening. Thank you for coming back week after week. I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk to you.
